[Applause]
okay
reason appears to have fallen on hard
times
popular culture plums new depths of dump
and political discourse has become a
race to the bottom we're living in an
era of scientific creationism 9/11
conspiracy theories psychic hotlines and
a resurgence of religious fundamentalism
people who think too well are often
accused of elitism and even in the
Academy there are attacks on no NGO
centrism the crime of letting logic
dominate our thinking but is this
necessarily a bad thing
perhaps reason is overrated many pundits
have argued that a good heart and
steadfast moral clarity are superior to
triangulations of overeducated policy
links like the best and brightest that
dragged us into the quagmire of Vietnam
and wasn't it reason that gave us the
means to despoil the planet and threaten
our species with weapons of mass
destruction in this way of thinking it's
character and conscience not
cold-hearted calculation that will save
us besides a human being is not a brain
on a stick my fellow psychologists have
shown that we're led by our bodies and
our emotions and use our puny powers of
Reason merely to rationalize our gut
feelings after the fact how could a
reasoned argument logically entail the
ineffectiveness of reasoned arguments
look you're trying to persuade us of
reasons impotence
you're not threatening us or a bride
'inna suggesting that we resolve the
issue with a show of hands or a beauty
contest by the very act of trying to
reason us into your position you're
conceding reasons potency reason isn't
up for grabs here it can't be you show
up for that debate and you've already
lost it but can read a recent lead us in
directions that are good or decent or
moral after all Hume pointed out that
reason is just a means to an end and the
end depends on the reasoner's passions
reason can lay out a roadmap to peace
and harmony
if the reasoner wants peace in hard
but it can also lay out a roadmap to
conflict and strife if the reason are
delights in conflict and strife can
reason force the reasoner to want less
cruelty and waste all on its own the
answer is no but it doesn't take much to
switch it to yes you need two conditions
the first is that reasoner's all care
about their own well-being that's one of
the passions that has to be present in
order for reason to go to work and it's
obviously present in all of us we all
care passionately about our own
well-being
the second condition is that reasoner's
are members of a community of reasoner's
who can affect one another's well-being
can exchange messages and comprehend
each other's reasoning and that's
certainly true of our gregarious and
loquacious species well-endowed with the
instinct for language well that sounds
good in theory but has it worked that
way in practice in particular can it
explain a momentous historical
development that I spoke about five
years ago here at Ted namely we seem to
be getting more humane centuries ago our
ancestors would burn cats alive as a
form of popular entertainment nights
wage constant war on each other by
trying to kill as many of each other's
peasants as possible
governments executed people for
frivolous reasons like stealing a
cabbage or criticizing the Royal Gardens
the executions were designed to be as
prolonged and as painful as possible
like crucifixion disembowelment breaking
on the wheel respectable people kept
slaves for all our flaws we have
abandoned these barbaric practices so do
you think it's human nature that's
changed not exactly I think we still
Harbor instincts that can erupt in
violence like greed tribalism
revenge dominance sadism but we also
have instincts that can steer us away
like self-control
empathy a sense of fairness what Abraham
Lincoln called the better angels of our
nature
so if human nature didn't change what
invigorated those better angels well
among other things our circle of empathy
expanded years ago our ancestors would
feel the pain only of their family and
people in their village
but with the expansion of literacy and
travel people started to sympathize with
wider and wider circles the Klan the
tribe the nation the race and perhaps
eventually all of humanity can
hard-headed scientists really gets so
much credit to soft hearted empathy they
can and do neurophysiologists have found
neurons in the brain that respond to
other people's actions the same way they
respond to our own empathy emerges early
in life perhaps before the age of 1
books on empathy have become bestsellers
like the empathic civilization and the
age of empathy I'm all for empathy I
mean who isn't but all on its own
it's a feeble instrument for making
moral progress for one thing it's
innately biased toward blood relations
babies and we want fuzzy animals as far
as empathy is concerned ugly outsiders
can go to hell and even our best
attempts to work up sympathy for those
who are unconnected with us false
miserably short a sad truth about human
nature that was pointed out by Adam
Smith let us suppose that the great
emperor of China was suddenly swallowed
up by an earthquake and let us consider
how a man of humanity in Europe would
react upon receiving intelligence of
this dreadful calamity he would I
imagine first of all expressed very
strongly his sorrow for the misfortune
of that unhappy people he would make
many melancholy reflections upon the
precariousness of human life and when
all these humane sentiments had been
once fairly expressed he would pursue
his business or his pleasure with the
same ease and tranquility as if no such
accident had happened if he was to lose
his little finger tomorrow he would not
sleep tonight but provided he never saw
them he would snore with the most
profound security over the ruins of a
hundred million of his brethren but if
empathy wasn't enough to make us more
humane what else was there wait you
didn't mention what might be one of our
most effective better angels reason it
reason has recent has muscle it's reason
that provides the push to widen that
circle of empathy everyone
of the humanitarian developments that
you mentioned originated with thinkers
who gave reasons for why some practice
was indefensible they demonstrated that
the way people treated some particular
group of others was logically
inconsistent with the way they insisted
on being treated themselves are you
saying that reason can actually change
people's minds don't people just stick
with whatever conviction serves their
interests or conforms to the culture
that they grew up in here's a
fascinating fact about us contradictions
bother us at least when we're forced to
confront them which is just another way
of seeing that we are susceptible to
eesof and if you look at the history of
moral progress you can trace a direct
pathway from reasoned arguments to
changes in the way that we actually feel
time and again a thinker would lay out
an argument as to why some practice was
indefensible irrational inconsistent
with values already held their essay
would go viral get translated into many
languages get debated at pubs and coffee
houses and salons and at dinner parties
and influence leaders legislators
popular opinions eventually their
conclusions get absorbed into the common
sense of decency erasing the tracks of
the original argument that had gotten us
there
few of us today feel any need to put
forth a rigorous full of topical
argument as to why slavery is wrong or
public hangings or beating children by
now these things just feel wrong but
just those arguments had to be made and
they were in centuries past are you
saying that people needed a step-by-step
argument to grasp why something might be
a wee bit wrong with burning heretics of
a stake oh they did here's the French
theologian Sebastian Costello making the
case Cowan says he's certain oh and
other sects say that they are who shall
be judge if the matter is certain to
whom is it so - Calvin
then what does he write so many books
about manifest truth if you have the
uncertainty we must define the heretics
simply as one with whom we disagree and
if then we're going to kill heretics the
logical outcome will be a war of
extermination since it is sure of
himself or with hideous punishments like
breaking on the wheel the prohibition in
era constitution of cruel and unusual
punishments was a response to a pamphlet
circulated in 1764 by the Italian jurist
Cesare Beccaria as punishments become
more cruel the minds of men which like
fluids always adjust to the level of the
objects that surround them become
hardened and after hundred years of
cruel punishments breaking on the wheel
causes normal fear than imprisonment
previously did for a punishment to
achieve its objective it is only
necessary that the harm that it inflicts
outweighs the benefit that derives from
the crime and into the calculation ought
to be factored the certainty of
punishment and the loss of the good that
a commission of the crime will produce
everything beyond this is superfluous
and therefore tyrannical but surely
anti-war movements depended on mass
demonstrations and catchy tunes by folk
singers and wrenching photographs of the
human costs of war no doubt but modern
anti-war movements reached back to a
long chain of thinkers who had argued as
to why we ought to mobilize our emotions
against war such as the father of
modernity Erasmus the advantages derived
from peace diffused themselves far at
night and reached great numbers while in
war if anything turns out happily the
Advanta tree downs only to a few and
those unworthy of reaping it
one man's safety is owing to the
destruction of another one man's prize
is derived from the plunder the cause of
rejoicings made by one side is to the
other a cause of mourneth whatever is
unfortunate in war is severely so indeed
and whatever on the contrary is called
good fortune is a savage and a cruel
good fortune and ungenerous happiness
deriving its existence from another's
woe but everyone knows that the movement
to abolish slavery
depended on faith and emotion it was a
movement spearheaded by the Quakers and
it only became popular when Harriet
Beecher Stowe's novel Uncle Tom's Cabin
became a best-seller but the ball got
rolling a century before John Locke
bucked the tide of millennia that had
regarded the practice as perfectly
natural he argued that it was
inconsistent with the principles of
rational government freedom of men under
government is to have a standing rule to
live by common to everyone at that
society and made by the legislative
power erected in it at liberty to follow
my own will in all things where that
rule prescribes not not to be subject to
the inconstant uncertain unknown
arbitrary will of another man as freedom
of nature is to be under no other
restraint but the law of nature those
words sound familiar
where have I read them before oh yes
if absolute sovereignty be not necessary
in a state how comes it to be so in a
family or if in a family why not in a
state since no reason can be alleged for
the one that will not hold more strongly
for the other if all men are born free
how is it that all women are born slaves
as they must be if the being subjected
to the inconstant uncertain unknown
arbitrary will of men be the perfect
condition of slavery that sort of
co-option is all in the job description
of reason one movement for the expansion
of rights inspires another because the
logic is the same and once that's
hammered home it becomes increasingly
uncomfortable to ignore the
inconsistency in the 1960s the civil
rights movement inspired the movement
for women's rights children's rights gay
rights and even animal rights but fully
two centuries before the Enlightenment
thinker Jeremy Bentham had exposed the
in defensibility of customary practices
such as the cruelty to animals the
question is not can they reason nor can
they talk but can they suffer and the
persecution of homosexuals as do any
primary mischief it's evident that it
produces no pain in anyone on the
contrary it produces pleasure the
partners are both willing if either of
them be unwilling the act isn't an
offence totally different in its nature
of effects it's a personal injury it's a
kind of rape as to any danger exclusive
of pain
the danger if any must consist in the
tendency of the example but what is the
tendency of this example to dispose
others to engage in the same practices
but this practice produces not paying of
any kind to anyone still in every case
it took at least a century for the
arguments of these great thinkers to
trickle down and infiltrate the
population as a whole kinda makes you
wonder about our own time
are there practices that we engage in
where the arguments against them are
there for all to see
but nonetheless we persist in them when
our great-grandchildren look back at us
will they be as appalled by some of our
practices as we are by our slave-owning
heretic burning wife-beating gay bashing
ancestors I'm sure everyone here can
think of an example I opted for the
mistreatment of animals and factory
farms the imprisonment of nonviolent
drug offenders have a toleration of rape
in our nation's prisons scrimping on
donations to life-saving charities in
the developing world the possession of
nuclear weapons the appeal to religion
to justify the otherwise unjustifiable
such as the ban on contraception what
about religious faith in general I'm not
holding my breath
still I have become convinced that
reason is the better angel that deserves
the greatest credit for the moral
progress our species has enjoyed and
that holds out the greatest hope for
continuing moral progress in the future
and if our friends you detect a flaw in
this argument just remember you'll be
depending on reason to point it out
thank you thank you
[Applause]